## [0.33.0](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@sinclair/typebox/v/0.33.0)

## Overview

Revision 0.33.0 adds the Refine runtime type and makes some ammendments to Unsafe types and well as string format handling. The focus on this Revision is to provide alternatives options to the global TypeRegistry, FormatRegistry and TypeSystem registration functions creating schematics with custom checks and inference.

There are some minor breaking changes in this Revision specific to string format handling and a minor revision is required.

## Contents

- [Refine Types](#Refine-Types)
- [Unsafe Types](#Unsafe-Types)

<a name="Refine-Types"></a>

### Refine Types

Revision 0.33.0 introduces a new Refine type that can be used to apply additional runtime checks to existing types. Refine types can offer an alternative to standard validation constraints, but do not include those constraints in the underlying schema representation. The following shows the same type implemented with and without Refine.

```typescript
// Using Constraints

const T1 = Type.String({ minLength: 5, maxLength: 5 })
//         ^
//         { type: 'string', minLength: 5, maxLength: 5 }

const A1 = Value.Check(T1, 'hello') // true
const B1 = Value.Check(T1, 'hi')    // false

// Using Refine

const T2 = Type.Refine(Type.String()).Check(value => value.length === 5).Done()
//         ^
//         { type: 'string' }

const A2 = Value.Check(T1, 'hello') // true
const B2 = Value.Check(T1, 'hi')    // false
```
Generally you should prefer Constraints over Refine. Refine does however offer a mechanism to express certain validation rules that would be difficult or impossible to handle otherwise. An example of this is cross property value dependence where the classic example of this would be ensuring two properties have the same value.

```typescript
const PasswordConfirmationType = Type.Object({
  password: Type.String(),
  confirmPassword: Type.String()
})
const PasswordConfirmation = Type.Refine(PasswordConfirmationSchema)
  .Check(value => value.password === value.confirmPassword, 'Passwords do not match')
  .Done()
```

<a name="Unsafe-Types"></a>

### Unsafe Types

Revision 0.33.0 makes a minor internal intrpretation change of Unsafe types where they are now treated the same as Any or Unknown by TypeBox's validators. They are also are now considered to be an integrated type.

Historically, the Unsafe type was introduced to allow TypeBox to support extended schematics for other validators in a time before TypeBox had built in validation support. The original the users of this type were often OpenAPI integrators that needed to represent `nullable` schematics for older versions of the OpenAPI specification. Unfortunately, TypeBox had difficulty integrating Unsafe into it's own validators as the schematics it represents are completely unknown to TypeBox.

With the introduction of Refine, the Unsafe type can finally be integrated into TypeBox's own validators with the provision that Unsafe is treated analogous to Any or Unknown but can be narrowed through refinement checks. 

```typescript
const UnsafeByte = Type.Unsafe<number>({ type: 'byte' })

const Byte = Type.Refine(UnsafeByte)
  .Check(value => typeof value === 'number')
  .Check(value => !isNaN(value))
  .Check(value => value >= 0)
  .Check(value => value < 256)
  .Done()

console.log(Value.Check(Byte, 0))     // false
console.log(Value.Check(Byte, 255))   // false
console.log(Value.Check(Byte, -1))    // true
console.log(Value.Check(Byte, NaN))   // true
```